IS IT WRONG TO CHEAT IN VIDEO GAMES?


Alexander Macdougall


_______________________________________

ABSTRACT (ONE SPACE ABOVE, TWO BELOW)

_______________________________________


Somebody stole my spaceship. I could only watch on as another human player waltzed up to my magnificent cosmic cruiser and effortlessly glitched through its shimmering titanium hull. Upon flying off with my ship, my anonymous holo-pirate demanded virtual game credits for the return of my intangible property. A violent frustration roused in me. Was a moral just wrong committed against me, or was I being irrationally attached to an intangible object? Did my digital pirate deserve to be banned from the game like an athlete caught doping? My intuition screamed yes on all fronts: I had been cheated and it felt real. But it was not really real. It was not like my car was stolen, so why was I so upset? Something was going on up in my cranial microprocessor. Perhaps a moral wrong was committed. So, by genesis of emotion, I will attempt to rationally argue that the use of exploits or enhancements in video games to gain an upper hand over other human players is morally wrong; and that such exploits should be dealt with in a manner akin to the policing of doping in sports. First, I will explore how a video game’s illusory experience is only superficially different from physical experiences and interactions. Furthermore, I will explain why the current frameworks which seek to prevent doping in sports should also apply to similar enhancements in video games, and that defying such frameworks ultimately damages the moral self. Walter Glannon’s definition of genetic enhancement will serve as the basis for what this paper considers ‘enhancement’ to be: the upgrading of functions and capacities beyond what is already sufficient (Glannon, p.1).

My first reason stems from the way we experience imagined realities and our own physical reality. It seems necessary to tackle this first, as the most intuitive counterpoint to this entire paper might be that video games are simply light cast on a screen, so any emotional response to cheating is equally fictional. However, this may be an unfair conclusion, as the brain cannot so easily distinguish between reality and illusion. Neuroscientist Don Vaughn states in Keith Stuart’s Guardian article “Medal of Dishonour,” that there is no mechanism in the human brain to differentiate reality from one’s imagination or a game (Keith Stuart, p.3). So, if my brain really thought my spaceship was being stolen, and the perpetrator knew their actions caused some degree of suffering, then their actions would appear to be immoral. Some may argue that this a moot point, akin to someone playing Hitler in a movie and then blaming him for genocide (Matt McCormick, p.278). The issue here is that, although digital, the actions of a gamer who uses exploits to knowingly infringe on other players’ abilities is committed with intention by an individual. So, was it morally wrong for the pirate to steal my ship via a game exploit? My brain sure thinks so. Other brains seem to think so too, as thousands of gamers are routinely banned from multiplayer games for similar exploits (Keith Stuart, p.2). Athletes, too, are routinely banned for cheating by way of performance enhancing drugs. But is this the correct course of action?

The same framework for treating digital enhancement à la biochemical enhancement is already in place: ban the player from playing. Foddy & Savulescu would likely argue against such punishment. Perhaps most relevant to the topic of this paper is the authors’ argument against radical technology as negatively affecting sport. The two counter an argument by philosopher Robert Redeker, who states that leniency toward doping puts a sport on a slippery slope where the athletes no longer embody the spirit of sport. Rather, the athlete has transformed from the best of humanity into an overachieving monstrosity (Foddy & Savulescu, p.517). The two authors go on to claim that equipment advancements, like the gradual modification of tennis racquets, generate their own nearly equivalent modifications of a sport. Though, individuals seem less inclined to equate such progress with that of biochemical advancements, like doping (ibid). I think the issue with their argument is that upgrading equipment and biological enhancement are not as closely related as they may infer. For instance, a runner with the most expensive shoes on the planet may still lose a 100m sprint to a barefoot runner on steroids with twice the muscle strength. If we equalize this scenario one way or the other, it seems to me that the expensive shoes do less to change the athlete than steroids. If we equalize it both ways, then we may have entered an arms race of enhancements where the achievements themselves are praised over the achievers. This, I think, is a reasonable enough position to warrant the maintenance of rules that prevent enhancements or exploits, whether in sports or video games.

Indeed, praising the achievements over the agents of achievement carries its own perceptible immorality, as it may erode individual autonomy and character. Walter Glannon notes that our moral selves and actions derive from our ability to create dispositions that lead to actions (Glannon, p.5). Essentially, my existence as a moral agent hinges on my ability to understand how an act might bring joy or suffering, and to act accordingly. Suppose I know that the 100m sprint is tomorrow and I take a pill that guarantees I will be fifty percent faster than my opponents. Was it really me who won the sprint, or was it the pill? Foddy & Savulescu might again rebuttal by demanding that each athlete is given the same pill. But then all our improved results are bound to the pill and not our disposition to train in an unenhanced manner.  So too with the online gamer. The pirate of my ship did not win his prize through virtual combat; he won it through an oversight in the game engine. His disposition was one of victory by whatever means to the dismay of myself. 

Now I must make the ultimate revelation: I was the pirate all along. I knew full well about this exploit, as it occurred against me once before, and I chose to act upon it to my own selfish interest. Yes, I had achieved victory in some sense, but it was a victory so hollow and devoid of achievement that there was no sense that I had really won anything. It was as if I had teleported from the starting line to the finish line without ever taking part in the race. Like so many activities in life, whether they are recreational or competitive, the knowledge and intent surrounding the activity matters for everyone involved. My brain feels the same way if someone steals my spaceship or if someone takes steroids and whoops me at the track meet, and the rules in either case are there to prevent lopsided defeats, hollow victories, and excessive achievements. 

Question 2

Nowadays, it seems that everyone is a universal pundit. When I go out for drinks with friends, it isn’t uncommon for the conversation to meander past the usual pleasantries and toward international politics, theoretical physics, conspiracy theories, and celebrity or personal gossip. Of course, none of us are politicians, physicists, secret members of the hidden grove, nor do we usually have any meaningful connection to the dirty laundry of celebrities or friends. From the neighborhood pub to the Instagram post, gossip and opinion abound like never before. 
Some may claim that the social media products of the Information Age have given us a sort of socially normalizing collective microphone, through which we may voice our relative approvals and disapprovals to the gradual moral benefit of mankind (Paul Billingham and Tom, p.371). This is a fickle business, though, as each individual rarely understands the full scope of whatever moral dilemma they so boldly tackle. Even more fickle is that online shaming, whether warranted or not, often financially benefits the corporations who own the mediums of communication. Essentially, any news is valuable news, and the greater the drama the greater the profit. I argue that this erratic socio-corporate reality is morally impermissible for two primary reasons: the moral purpose of a business is generally indeterminate, and the broad public shaming of individuals and groups for corporate profit may create long-lasting divisions while also unfairly framing the morality of individuals. Grab your digital pitchfork and get ready to burn another witch of the web. 

My first primary apprehension is the degree to which businesses are concerned with morality relative to profit. The unfortunate answer appears to be that market impulses favor profit over morality, and that both defenders and detractors note this reality. Milton Friedman, outspoken in his defence of profit over social responsibility, claims that even seemingly generous corporate acts, like charitable donations, are most often “cloaks of social responsibility” designed for financial utility (Friedman, p.3). If this is true, then social media platforms likely wear the same cloak. For instance, although the name social media implies a medium of social interaction, perhaps with social benefits too, these interactions are often obscured by a limited number of characters per post, reach an audience determined by algorithm rather than substantiveness, and are increasingly tailored to low attention spans. Such characteristics appear to lend themselves more to increased user interaction, and thus financial gain, rather than any sort of social benefit. Those who oppose Friedman’s position offer some alternative opinions to the social responsibility of businesses. Though, their thoughts on the matter may simply highlight the contemporary pitfalls of corporate social media. 

There seems to be a moral issue with how social media corporations view their userbase as purely a means to profit. Thomas Mulligan states in his paper “A Critique of Milton Friedman’s Essay ‘The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its Profits’” that businesspeople (i.e., those who have far reaching decision-making authority within corporate structures) are better trained than most individuals to understand the plausible social outcomes of their actions. They regularly gather information, assess risks, and act based on their analysis (Mulligan, p.268). I believe that both Mulligan and Friedman are correct in their statements. In Friedman’s case, corporate entities often place profit over ethics, as a company can survive without ethics but not without profit. So, any good-will is largely a feint designed to increase profits; not to altruistically allay suffering or, in the case of social media, better connect the world. In tandem, the corporate actors who uphold this condicio sine qua non are devilishly those among society who are perhaps best trained to deeply analyze and act accordingly to social welfare. As Mulligan posits, corporations ought to uphold a framework of social responsibility (Mulligan, p.269), which seems especially poignant given their expertise. Until then, it appears social media users are simply means of corporate profiteering.

My second primary concern lies in the negative moral outcomes that corporately owned social media platforms can produce. Laura Wildemann Kane notes on the matter that frivolous online shaming has transformed shame into a mechanism for social abuse, which can create fear and paranoia or dilute feelings of shame by normalizing the act (Kane, p.603). The COVID-19 isolation and vaccine debate comes to mind. Across social media, friends and families divided themselves over the ethics and efficacy of isolation and vaccination. Anecdotally, those in favor of stringent measures were often paradoxically labeled nazis and communists, while those against stringent measures were often labeled racist ignorami. As Guy Aitchison and Saladin Meckled-Garcia put it, such shaming assaults the moral standing of the victim insofar as the basic respect everyone is owed (Aitchison & M-G, p.2). And the battlefield for these public pundits? Instagram, TikTok, Facebook, Twitter, Spotify, YouTube, and so on. These corporate platforms did take some measures to at least alert readers, viewers, and listeners to the opinions of these ‘influencers,’ though this often inflamed popular opinion further. Perhaps the perceived socio-psychological damage brought about by this corporately mediated debate will be more long-lived than the physical damage of COVID itself. 

In summation, there is no clear indication that corporations currently have a popularly recognized moral obligation to society, which gives such entities a wide freedom to pursue profit over social wellbeing. Additionally, without clearly defined moral obligations, corporately owned social media platforms leave individuals largely to their own chaotic devices to the benefit of the corporation. The result is a Wild West of blame, shame, and social ostracization, whose lingering damage affects individuals and groups across society. Thus, corporations should not go on without moral blame for profits generated by sensationalism and online shaming. They are an intrinsic part of society and carry with them the ability to assess and decide for a profit. They know what they are doing. They can see the results. They should not hide behind the shield of economic intent. 
